---
title: Property Rights with an eye to Intellectual Property
date: 2018-08-07
---


All property rights are relative. Property rights are about excluding
others from the use of the property in question. A world with a single
inhabitant it unchanged whether that inhabitant is considered to own
everything that exists or nothing that exists. So practical philosophy
of property rights is not about determining who owns what, but rather
of determining who has a better claim to ownership of what than whom.
As far as I can tell, there are only two 'obvious' cases which we can
determine directly, rather than derivative from other claims of
ownership: self-ownership, each person has a better claim to their own
body (reflected here in the language that vernacular English forces on
me) than anyone else; and ownership of the commons, no person has any
better claim to the commons than anyone else (though this is smuggling
in the tricky bits under the term 'commons').

Property is about the right of access, not the right of exclusivity.
Exclusivity is a derivative right that follows from the right to
access rival goods; if I have a right to access a rival good, then
your accessing that good infringes on my right to access that good. I
have the right to control my body, because I own my body, and since at
anyone point only a single entity can be in control of my body, since
it is a singular thing, then my right must not be interfered with;
other's do not have any right to control my body. Rights are an
expression of positive protection of an individual, they do not need
to reference external parties, e.g. I have a right not be murdered, I
do not have a right to you not murdering me except as a special case
of that more general right. Note that exclusive intellectual 'property
rights' cannot be worded in such a way; they must always reference
external entities.
