---
title: Honesty
date: 2018-07-25
---

Why tell the truth? There are possible explanations based on repeated
social interaction and social status, as well as explanations based on
relatedness (if honesty benefits the receptive communicative partner,
and that partner shares genes with the transmitting partner, then
genes for honesty can benefit themselves in another body). However
these accounts fail to explain honesty between unrelated, transient
contacts. It might be suggested that honesty in towards unrelated,
transient contacts is a mere 'mis-firing' of the evolved within-group
or within family honesty, but I think this is an unsatisfactory
answer. Humans already have behaviours which are specifically directed
towards in-group and family members, and so must already have some
apparatus to distinguish those groups. It would be strange if honesty
simply failed to tie into those existing cognitive systems.
Furthermore, these accounts provide only very poor explanations for
inter-species honesty/honest-signals.

Why communicate at all? Communication is an exchange of information.
In this context it is best analyzed as unidirectional; any
bidirectional communication can be construed as merely two
simultaneous instances of unidirectional communication. So to
communicate is to give information to another entity. Communication is
only even potentially useful if the receptive partner's behaviour may
be changed by the received information. Communicating with a rock does
not meaningfully (at this level of analysis) change the world, and
does not produce evolutionarily relevant effects. So, communication,
if it is evolved, must have evolved to be directed towards agents, and
in particular evolved to modify the behaviour of those agents; this
is, in essence, Krebs & Dawkins '76.

So (modulo some sloppiness regarding the difference between the
organismal and the genetic levels of explanation) the point of
communication is to cause other agents to act in ways which are
beneficial to the communicator. This reduces our original question
"Why be honest?" to "Why does honesty make others useful?", or "Why is
honesty the best policy?". To answer this question we need to explore
what we mean by 'honesty'. Temporarily neglecting considerations of
intent, honest communication is true communication, which is
communication which tends to produce true beliefs in its recipient.
Where the evolutionarily relevant notion of truth is that a belief is
true if it produces behaviours 'as-if' it were true. That is, if it
produces behaviours which correspond with the behaviours that an
idealized agent would perform under the same goals. Under this use, it
is 'true' that jumping off a cliff will hurt, even if in fact it will
kill you instantly; because pain is merely a tag classifying events as
harmful, and in general dying is harmful from the point of view of
evolving entities. (Aside: It is in this sense that useful fictions, like
Newtonian mechanics are 'true'.)
